Bodgitt and Scarper, LLC 2.1.2 user guide


Table of Contents
-----------------
1. Overview
2. Prerequisites
3. Running the application
    a. Launching the server
    b. Launching the network client
    c. Launching the stand-alone mode
4. Using the server
    a. Configuring
    b. Using the server
5. Using the network client
    a. Configuring
    b. Using the network client
6. Using the stand-alone mode
    a. Configuring
    b. Using the stand-alone
7. Using the client GUI
    a. Booking a contractor
    b. Un-booking a contractor
    c. Refreshing the contractor list
    d. Searching for a contractor
8. Troubleshooting


1. Overview
-----------
  This application is to assist customer service representatives (CSRs) with booking contractors for their customers.
  It allows the CSRs to view the list of contractors, as well as book and un-book contractors for a given customer an
  also to search for contractors based on certain criteria.


2. Prerequisites
----------------
  The user must first have the Java Runtime Environment installed on their computer. At least version 7 is required.
  This can be downloaded from Oracle's website.


3. Running the application
---------------------------
  The application is typically run from command line, passing different arguments to launch the application in
  different modes.

  a. Launching the server
        java -jar runme.jar server

  b. Launching the network client
        java -jar runme.jar (no args)

  c. Launching the stand-alone mode
        java -jar runme.jar alone


4. Using the server
-------------------
  The server accepts incoming connections from clients and allows them to interact with the database. Upon launching the
  server, the user is asked to select a database file to work with.

   a. Configuring
        Before the server will listen for incoming connections, the user has to select a compatible database to work
        with first. Click "Select file..." button an navigate to where the database is located. Click "OK" when done to
        open the server main GUI. Note, the database location is persisted for future launches of the server, but the
        user still will have the option to change the saved database location next time the application is launched.

   b. Using the server
        On the main server GUI, click the "Start" button to start the server and listen for incoming connections.

        If the user wishes to stop the server, they can click the "Shutdown" server to stop listening for clients and
        exit the application.


5. Using the network client
-------------------
  The network client allows a user to interact with a remote database. The client can perform various operations on a
  list of contractors in the database. Upon launching the network client, the user is asked to enter the hostname that
  the server is listening on.

    a. Configuring
         Before using the network client, the user must enter the hostname that the server is listening on. Click on OK
         to connect to the server and launch the client GUI. Note, the hostname is persisted for future launches of the
         network client, but the user still has the option to change the saved hostname next time the application
         launches.

    b. Using the network client
         The network client will contact the server to communicate with the database. When communication is established,
         the client GUI will launch. For instructions on using the client GUI, please see "7. Using the client GUI".

  Note: the network client must have a running server it can connect to.


6. Using the stand-alone mode
-----------------------------
  The stand-alone mode allows the user to use the database and client as one process without the need for a network.
  Only one virtual machine is used. Other clients won't be able to connect to this process.

    a. Configuring
       Before using the stand-alone mode, the user has to select a compatible database to work with first. Click
       "Select file..." button an navigate to where the database is located. Click "OK" when done to open the
       stand-alone mode. Note, the database location is persisted for future launches of the stand-alone mode, but the
       user still has the option to change this location next time the application launches.

    b. Using the stand-alone mode
       The stand-alone mode from this point acts like the client GUI in the network mode. The functionality is
       identical. For instructions on using the client GUI, please see "7. Using the client GUI".


7. Using the client GUI
-----------------------
  The client GUI allows the user to interact with the database via interactive components.

  The client GUI consists of 3 main areas.
   - The search panel at the top of the GUI.
   - The contractor list panel in the center of the GUI.
   - The actions panel at the bottom of the GUI.

   When the GUI launches, the user will be presented with a list of all contractors in the database and their associated
   details.

     a. Booking a contractor
          To book a contractor, click on a contractor of choice. If the contractor is available for booking, the "Book"
          button will become enabled. The user will then be asked to input a customer id for the booking. The customer
          id must consist of 8 digits only. If the user submits an invalid customer id, they will receive a warning
          message box stating so. If the booking was successful, the record in the table on the GUI will be reflected to
          show the booking. If another client booked the record or the record no longer exists since the user started
          the booking request, they will be alerted to this, and the record list will be automatically refreshed.

     b. Un-booking a contractor
          To un-book a contractor, click on a contractor of choice. If the contractor is already booked, the "Un-Book"
          button will become enabled. If the un-booking was successful, the record in the table on the GUI will be
          reflected to show the un-booking. If another client un-booked the record or the record no longer exists since
          the user started the un-booking request, they will be alerted to this, and the record list will be
          automatically refreshed.

     c. Refreshing the contractor list
          To refresh the contractor list and get the latest state of contractors at any time, the user can click the
          "Refresh" button.

     d. Searching for a contractor
          The user can search for a contractor by specifying a name or a location or both. Note, search results are
          based on an exact match. If the user enters a name, or a location or both to search on, they can either click
          the "Search" button or press enter to perform the search. If there are many matches, the matching contractors
          will be shown in the contractor list. If there are no matches, the list will be empty. The user can clear the
          search results by clicking on the "Refresh" button.


8. Troubleshooting
------------------
  If any errors occur while using the server, network client or stand-alone mode, the user will be showing an error
  message detailing the error. Depending on the severity of the error, they user may be able to continue using the
  application, or the application may terminate if it can no longer run. Logging will be outputted to the terminal that
  the application was launched from, for further information when such problems exist.
